Hi, I am Delio Vicini, and I am PhD student at EPFL.
In this talk, I will present our paper on
”Differentiable Signed Distance Function Rendering”.
This is joint work with Sebastien Speierer
and Wenzel Jakob.
Given a scene description consisting of geometry,
textures and material parameters, we can use
a rendering algorithm to simulate how light
interacts with this scene.
The result of this rendering process is a
realistic image.
In this paper, we investigate the inverse
problem of recovering scene parameters given
one or more images.
We could for example try to reconstruct the
shape of the Stanford bunny from a set of
reference images.
Starting from a simple initialization like
the sphere, our goal is to find the geometry
that minimizes the difference between the
rendered images and the reference images.
Here we only show a single viewpoint, but
in practice we usually use multiple reference
images.
We can minimize the difference between rendered
and reference image by using a differentiable
renderer.
A differentiable renderer computes an image
as a differentiable function of the shape
parameters.
We can then minimize the loss by computing
the derivative with respect to the parameters
and running gradient descent.
The optimization eventually recovers a shape
that closely matches the one observed in the
reference images.
To reconstruct 3D shapes, we need to pick
a suitable geometry representation.
In forward rendering we typically use triangle
meshes.
They can be rendered very efficiently, but
their fixed topology is a limitation when
recovering unknown objects.
An alternative is to use a volumetric rendering
model, which can recover objects of arbitrary
topology.
On the flip side, it loses some of the simplicity
of surface rendering.
A third option is to represent surfaces implicitly
as the zero-level set of a function.
A particularly useful type of implicit representations
are signed distance functions.
Implicit surface representations both support
topological changes during optimization and
retain most of the simplicity of surface rendering.
In this project, we focus on differentiable
rendering of surfaces represented by signed
distance functions.
In short, the goal of this paper is to differentiate
physically-based renderings with respect to
the parameters of an SDF.
Many people have worked on using SDFs for
inverse rendering problems.
However, most previous papers have to either
use some form of a silhouette or mask loss,
do not generalize to gradients of shadows
or global illumination effects, or require
meshing of the implicit surface using marching
cubes.
We propose a new differentiable SDF rendering
method.
Our method generalizes to effects such as
shadows and indirect illumination.
Our algorithm does not require any silhouette
information or explicit meshing.
Our method is based on a reparameterization,
and we carefully derive the Jacobians to make
sure we don’t introduce any bias.
Lastly, we show that this method can directly
reconstruct shapes from images using gradient-descent,
without the need for any complex priors or
silhouette losses.
An obvious question at this point is of course
whether we use neural networks for rendering
or representation.
The short answer is that we don’t.
We use physically-based rendering to estimate
shadows and interreflections using Monte Carlo
integration.
As a representation, we use SDFs that are
stored on a dense regular grid.
An alternative would be to model the SDF values
using a neural network.
Fundamentally, the problem of differentiable
SDF rendering is orthogonal to the concrete
choice of the underlying representation.
Our method is general and does not assume
a specific relation of differentiable parameters
to SDF values.
We use a regular grid for simplicity and ease
of implementation.
Our goal is to differentiate pixel values
with respect to the parameters of an SDF.
In this example, we computed the gradients
of the rendered image with respect to a translation
of the foreground shape.
As you can see, translating this shape not
only produces gradients of directly visible
edges, but also of the shadows cast onto the
background plane.
The blue and red values correspond to negative
and positive gradient signs respectively.
This gradient image here was produced by differentiating
a single parameter, but in practice we might
differentiate millions of shape parameters
at once.
The main challenge in computing such gradients
are visibility discontinuities or occlusions.
For example, consider this scene of a bunny
in front of a background.
For a given pixel, we compute its color by
integrating the image contribution function
f(x) over that pixel.
In this example here, the final pixel color
is a blend of the yellow object color and
the white slide background.
Let’s see now what happens when we translate
the object horizontally.
Here, we denote the horizontal translation
by “pi”.
The translation will affect how much of the
pixel is covered by the object and therefore
change the resulting pixel color.
For that reason, we know that the gradient
of the pixel color integral must be non-zero.
However, when we render this object, we approximate
the pixel color by Monte Carlo integration.
This means we sample the integration domain
with random samples x_i and average their
contributions to estimate the pixel color.
There is now a problem if we want to reason
about the change in pixel color due to the
translation.
The translation of the shape will not affect
the Monte Carlo samples.
Therefore, differentiating this Monte Carlo
estimator results in a gradient that is zero.
But this is incorrect, since we previously
established that this gradient has to be nonzero.
The problem is that there is a discontinuity
in the integrand.
The position of the discontuinity depends
on the parameter “pi”.
The motion of the discontinuity is not captured
when naively differentiating individual Monte
Carlo samples.
But just how important are these discontinuities?
Here, we compare the result of ignoring them
to our method, that correctly accounts for
them.
The two gradient images differ on the visible
edges of the surface, but otherwise look quite
similar.
When running an optimization, we quickly see
that ignoring discontinuities can result in
catastrophic failure and the optimization
just diverges.
There are two classes of methods that can
be used to address this issue.
The first one is edge sampling, where additional
samples are explicitly placed on the discontinuities.
This can be challenging to do, as it requires
extra data structures or complex sampling
strategies
The second approach is to reparameterize the
integral.
This is done such that the samples effectively
move with the discontinuity.
This circumvents the problem and allows to
obtain unbiased gradient estimates without
edge sampling.
In this work, we propose a new reparameterization
method that is tailored to SDFs.
To make this idea of reparameterization more
concrete.
let’s look at a toy problem in 1D.
Let’s say we have some continuous function
f(x) that is defined on the real line.
We multiply this function with a discontinuous
step function with parameter-dependent position.
The value of the parameter “pi” controls
the position of the step function.
Our goal is to compute the derivative of the
integral of this function with respect to
the parameter “pi”.
The problem is now that there is a parameter
dependent discontinuity in the integrand.
For this example, we can come up with a very
simple reparameterization that introduces
a new variable “y”.
We can then express the integral as an integration
over the variable “y”.
This new integral has the same value as the
original one, but the discontinuity is now
independent of “pi”.
Conceptually, the gradient with respect to
“pi” will now be captured by evaluating
the function “f” at a position that depends
on “pi”.
Since we eliminated the moving discontinuity,
we can now correctly estimate the gradient
by simply differentiating a Monte Carlo estimator.
To introduce our reparameterization for SDFs,
let’s look at the problem in a simplified
2D setting.
Here we render a 2D SDF to a 1D pixel by tracing
rays through the pixels support from the left.
The parameter “pi” controls the vertical
translation of the yellow disk.
By default, translating this disk will not
affect incident rays.
Moving the object would simply move the ray
intersection locations along the rays.
Our goal is now to build a reparameterization
that makes sampled rays move with the occluder.
We can think of this as evaluating a motion
vector field at the ray intersection location.
In this example here, the rays that hit the
moving foreground object will “move” with
the parameter “pi”, and the ones on the
background object will stay still.
The motion vector field “V” is defined
to describe the surface motion due to the
parameter “pi”.
For SDFs this parameter-dependent motion can
easily be evaluated as the product of the
SDF’s normal and the SDF’s parameter derivative.
Please see the paper for a detailed derivation
and justification.
The previously described approach results
in the motion vector field being evaluated
on this red line.
At first this seems fine, but there is a major
issue with this approach
The discontinuity in the evaluation of “V”
causes the reparameterization itself to be
discontinuous.
This results in incorrect gradients and therefore
this approach won’t work.
This problem was also encountered in prior
work by Bangaru and colleagues.
While their paper addressed rendering of triangle
meshes, the fundamental problem of constructing
a continuous reparameterization is the same.
In their paper they solve the issue as follows.
For each ray, they trace a set of auxiliary
rays that intersect the scene.
They then evaluate the surface motion at each
auxiliary ray, and average the result to obtain
a continuous reparameterization.
Mathematically, this corresponds to applying
a convolution.
This works and can also be applied to SDFs
but tracing all these auxiliary rays is expensive.
In our work, we solve this issue by leveraging
the global structure imposed by the SDF.
Our motion vector field can be evaluated for
points that aren’t on the actual surface.
We build a valid reparameterization by evaluating
the motion along a continuous curve.
As long as this curve touches the surface
on the discontinuities themselves, this will
result in the right gradients.
We can construct these evaluation locations
by building on sphere tracing, which is the
algorithm that is used to intersect rays with
an SDF.
Given a ray, sphere tracing traverses the
space in steps of the size corresponding to
the distance to the nearest surface.
This distance can be trivially obtained by
querying the SDF.
Sphere tracing then repeatedly takes steps
until eventually an intersection with a surface
is reached or the ray escapes the scene.
We can now modify the standard sphere tracing
method as follows
We can take all the intermediate distances
that were encountered along the ray.
We then compute a weighted sum of those distances.
This results in a new distance ”t”.
We design the weights such that as the ray
approaches a discontinuity, the distance ”t”
will converge to the distance to that specific
discontinuity.
So instead naively evaluating the vector field
”V” at the ray intersection,
we now evaluate “V” on a continuous line
of points.
This ensures that our reparameterization is
continuous, which allows to then correctly
compute gradients while accounting for occlusion
effects.
There are a few more aspects that I didn't
have time to cover.
In practice, we need to reparameterize the
spherical integration domain,
and we also need to make this all work for
nested integrals along light paths.
You can find those details in the paper.
We validate the gradients computed using our
method against finite differences on a range
of scene.
We can see that our method closely matches
the reference, even for gradients of shadows
and reflections.
Our method can then be used to reconstruct
geometry directly from images using gradient
descent.
Here the shape of the dragon is recovered
from 12 input images.
We optimize SDFs using the Adam optimizer
and in each iteration enforce the SDF property
by solving the Eikonal equation.
In this more complex example, we reconstruct
shape, texture and roughness of this chair
all simultaneously.
The albedo and roughness variation is represented
by 3D textures.
The result is re-rendered under an illumination
condition that is different from the one used
during optimization.
Our method generalizes to differentiating
secondary effects such as shadows and global
illumination.
It turns out that for scenarios with limited
observations such gradients can really benefit
shape reconstruction.
In this example, we try to reconstruct this
red object from a single view.
In the middle we ignore the gradients of the
shadow.
On the right we use our method to also optimize
the shape based on the shadow that we see.
Ignoring the shadows leads to the optimizer
trying to match the darkness of the background
by placing small surface parts.
When re-rendering the recovered geometry from
a different view, we see that accounting for
secondary gradients allowed us to recover
something that is surprisingly close to the
true shape even from a single view.
On the other hand, ignoring secondary effects
completely fails to recover the true shape
We can observe similar behavior in this scene,
where we try to reconstruct this bunny that
is visible both directly and through a rough
mirror surface.
We again optimize using only a single input
view, and again ignoring the indirect gradients
results in the optimizer not being able to
match the appearance of the object in the
reflection.
We also compare our approach to the reparameterization
introduced by Bangaru and colleagues.
Their method was designed for triangle meshes
but can be adapted to SDFs.
This is the only prior work that can support
physically-based differentiable SDF rendering.
They construct a continuous reparameterization
by applying a convolution over ray directions.
If we use too few samples to evaluate this
convolution, the reconstructed geometry suffers
from artifacts.
On the other hand, higher sample counts lead
to much higher computation times.
Our method both gives accurate results and
runs faster than previous work.
Here we compare both methods on a scene where
we vary the number of reference images.
Our method is more accurate and can therefore
more robustly reconstruct the shape even at
a low number of input views.
In this example here, the difference becomes
a bit smaller as the number of views is increased.
We can also visualize the averaged optimization
results over 8 different sets of reference
images.
The haze in these images is due to different
configurations producing drastically different
results.
Again, our method is more robust and consistent
than the previous approach.
One limitation of our SDF optimization is
that the problem isn’t necessarily convex.
Here we tried to reconstruct this Lego bulldozer
and our method filled in some of the parts
of the shape that should not be filled in.
In these cases, the gradient does not provide
sufficient information to escape this undesirable
local minimum.
This is a limitation of reconstructing shapes
using a differentiable surface rendering method
and doesn’t just affect our method.
In summary, our method is the first general
differentiable SDF rendering approach that
can also differentiate secondary effects.
We leveraged the sphere tracing algorithm
to construct a reparameterization of the domain
that handles discontinuities.
This allows to reconstruct shapes without
a silhouette or mask loss.
For future work, it would be interesting to
try to reduce the issue of undesirable local
minima.
This could be done by initializing using a
volumetric reconstruction or by introducing
semitransparent rendering model.
It would also be interesting to see if we
could apply a similar approach to triangle
meshes.
One could try to build a reparameterization
of a triangle mesh by collecting some extra
information during the BVH traversal in the
ray intersection routine.
Finally, the paper and supplemental video
are available on our website and an open-source
implementation based on Mitsuba 3 can be found
on GitHub.
Thank you for your attention!